CHAPTER 3

Enquire Within
upon Everything

‘When I first began tinkering with a software program that even-
tually gave rise to the idea of the World Wide Web, I named it
Enquire, short for Enquire Within upon Everything, a musty old
book of Victorian advice I noticed as a child in my parents’ house
outside London. With its title suggestive of magic, the book
served as a portal to a world of information, everything from how
to remove clothing stains to tips on investing money. Not a per-
fect analogy for the Web, but a primitive starting point.

What that first bit of Enquire code led me to was something
much larger, a vision encompassing the decentralized, organic
growth of ideas, technology, and society. The vision I have for the
Web is about anything being potentially connected with anything.
It is a vision that provides us with new freedom, and allows us to
grow faster than we ever could when we were fettered by the

1a a

weaving the wes

hierarchical classification systems into which we bound our-
selves. It leaves the entirety of our previous ways of working as
just one tool among many. It leaves our previous fears for the
future as one set among many, And it brings the workings of soci-
ety closer to the workings of our minds.

Unlike Enquire Within upon Everything, the Web that I have
tried to foster is not merely a vein of information to be mined,
nor is it just a reference or research tool. Despite the fact that the
ubiquitous www and .com now fuel electronic commerce and stock
markets all over the world, this is a large, but just one, part of the
Web. Buying books from Amazon.com and stocks from E-trade is
not all there is to the Web. Neither is the Web some idealized space
where we must remove our shoes, eat only fallen fruit, and eschew
commercialization.

The irony is that in all its various guises—commerce, research,
and surfing—the Web is already so much a part of our lives that
familiarity has clouded our perception of the Web itself. To
understand the Web in the broadest and deepest sense, to fully
partake of the vision that I and my colleagues share, one must
understand how the Web came to be.

The story of how the Web was created has been told in various
books and magazines, Many accounts I've read have been distorted
or just plain wrong. The Web resulted from many influences on
my mind, half-formed thoughts, disparate conversations, and seem-
ingly disconnected experiments. I pieced it together as I pursued
my regular work and personal life. I articulated the vision, wrote
the first Web programs, and came up with the now pervasive
acronyms URL (then UDI}, HTTP, HTML, and, of course, World
Wide Web. But many other people, most of them unknown, con-
tributed essential ingredients, in much the same almost random
fashion. A group of individuals holding a common dream and
working together at a distance brought about a great change.

My telling of the real story will show how the Web's evolu-
tion and its essence are inextricably linked. Only by understand-
2

 

enguire within upon everything

ing the Web at this deeper level will people ever truly grasp what
its full potential can be.

Journalists have always asked me what the crucial idea was,
or what the singular event was, that allowed the Web to exist one
day when it hadn't the day before. They are frustrated when I
tell them there was no “Eureka!” moment. It was not like the leg-
endary apple falling on Newton's head to demonstrate the con-
cept of gravity. Inventing the World Wide Web involved my
growing realization that there was a power in arranging ideas in
an unconstrained, weblike way. And that awareness came to me
through precisely that kind of process. The Web arose as the
answer to an open challenge, through the swirling together of
influences, ideas, and realizations from many sides, until, by the
wondrous offices of the human mind, a new concept jelled. It
was a process of accretion, not the linear solving of one well-
defined problem after another.

I am the son of mathematicians. My mother and father were
part of the team that programmed the world's first commercial,
stored-program computer, the Manchester University "Mark I,"
which was sold by Ferranti Ltd. in the early 1950s. They were
full of excitement over the idea that, in principle, a person could
program a computer to do most anything. They also knew, how-
ever, that computers were good at logical organizing and process-
ing, but not random associations. A computer typically keeps
information in rigid hierarchies and matrices, whereas the
human mind has the special ability to link random bits of data.
When I smell coffee, strong and stale, I may find myself again in
a small room over a corner coffeehouse in Oxford. My brain
makes a link, and instantly transports me there.

One day when I came home from high school, I found my
father working on a speech for Basil de Ferranti. He was reading
books on the brain, looking for clues about how to make a com-
puter intuitive, able to complete connections as the brain did. We
discussed the point; then my father went on to his speech and I

3Weaving the web

went on to my homework. But the idea stayed with me that com-
puters could become much more powerful if they could be pro-
grammed to link otherwise unconnected information,

This challenge stayed on my mind throughout my studies at
Queen's College at Oxford University, where I graduated in 1976
with a degree in physics. It remained in the background when I
built my own computer with an early microprocessor, an old tele-
vision, and a soldering iron, as well as during the few years I
spent as a software engineer with Plessey Telecommunications
and with D.G. Nash Ltd.

Then, in 1980, I took a brief software consulting job with
CERN,! the famous European Particle Physics Laboratory in
Geneva. That's where I wrote Enquire, my first weblike program.
I wrote it in my spare time and for my personal use, and for no
loftier reason than to help me remember the connections among
the various people, computers, and projects at the lab. Still, the
larger vision had taken firm root in my consciousness.

Suppose all the information stored on computers everywhere were
linkeci I thought. Suppose I could program my computer to create a
space in which anything could be linked to anything. All the bits of
information in every computer at CERN, and on the planet,
would be available to me and to anyone else. There would be a
single, global information space.

Once a bit of information in that space was labeled with an
address, I could tell my computer to get it. By being able to refer-
ence anything with equal ease, a computer could represent asso-
ciations between things that might seem unrelated but somehow

did, in fact, share a relationship. A web of information would
form.

1 The name CERN derives from the name of the international council {Conseil
Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire], which originally started the lab. The
council no longer exists, and ‘Nuclear’ no longer describes the physics done
there, so while the name CERN has stuck, it is not regarded as an acronym.

4

 

 

enquire within upon everything

Computers might not find the solutions to our problems, but
they would be able to do the bulk of the legwork required, assist
ing our human minds in intuitively finding ways through the
maze. The added excitement was that computers also could follow
and analyze the tentative connective relationships that defined
much of our society's workings, unveiling entirely new ways to
see our world. A system able to do that would be a fantastic thing
for managers, for social scientists, and, ultimately, for everyone.

Unbeknownst to me at that early stage in my thinking, sev-
eral people had hit upon similar concepts, which were never
implemented. Vannevar Bush, onetime dean of engineering at
MIT, became head of the U.S. Office of Scientific Research and
Development during World War II and oversaw development of
the first atomic bomb. In a 1945 article in the Atlantic Monthly
titled “As We May Think,” he wrote about a photo-electro-
mechanical machine called the Memex, which could, by a
process of binary coding, photocells, and instant photography,
make and follow cross-references among microfilm documents.

Ted Nelson, a professional visionary, wrote in 1965 of “Liter-
ary Machines," computers that would enable people to write and
publish in a new, nonlinear format, which he called hypertext.
Hypertext was "nonsequential” text, in which a reader was not
constrained to read in any particular order, but could follow links
and delve into the original document from a short quotation. Ted
described a futuristic project, Xanadu, in which all the world’s
information could be published in hypertext. For example, if you
were reading this book in hypertext, you would be able to follow
a link from my reference to Xanadu to further details of that pro-
ject. In Ted's vision, every quotation would have been a link back
to its source, allowing original authors to be compensated by a
very small amount each time the quotation was read. He had the
dream of a utopian society in which all information could be
shared among people who communicated as equals. He struggled
for years to find funding for his project, but success eluded him.

5weaving the wee

Doug Engelbart, a researcher at Stanford University, demon-
strated a collaborative workspace called NLS (ON Line System} in
the 1960s. Doug's vision was for people to use hypertext as a tool
for group work. In order to help himself steer his computer's cur-
Sor across the screen and select hypertext links with ease, Doug
invented a wooden block with sensors and a ball underneath,
and called it a mouse. In a now-famous video, which I didn't see
until 1994, Doug demonstrated using electronic mail and hyper-
text links with great agility with his homemade mouse in his
right hand and a five-key piano-chord keyboard in his left hand.
The idea was that a person could interface with the machine in a
very close, natural way. Unfortunately, just like Bush and Nelson,
Doug was too far ahead of his time. The personal computer revo-
lution, which would make Engelbart's "mouse" as familiar as the
pencil, would not come along for another fifteen years. With that
revolution, the idea of hypertext would percolate into software
design.

Of course, the next great development in the quest for global
connectivity was the Internet, a general communications infra-
structure that links computers together, on top of which the Web
rides. The advances by Donald Davis, by Paul Barran, and by
Vint Cerf, Bob Kahn, and colleagues had already happened in the
1970s, but were only just becoming pervasive.

I happened to come along with time, and the right interest
and inclination, after hypertext and the Internet had come of age.
The task left to me was to marry them together.

 

 

 

Tangles,

Links, and Webs

‘The research center for particle physics known as CERN straddles
the French-Swiss border near the city of Geneva. Nestled under
the limestone escarpments of the Jura mountains, ten minutes
from the ski slopes, with Lac Leman below and Mont Blanc
above, it offered unique research opportunitics, and the area

a very pleasant place to live.
ai meen an scientists arrived at CERN from all over the
world to investigate the most fundamental properties of matter.
Using enormous machines, they would accelerate tiny nuclear
particles through a series of tubes that, though only a few inches
wide, ran for several kilometers within a mammoth circular
underground tunnel. Researchers would rev up the particles to
extremely high energies, then allow them to collide. For an

unimaginably brief instant, new particles might be made, then
7