 

weaving the web

things. He is the kind of engineer who can be driven mad by the

incompatibility of power plugs. No wonder, then, that he would
be attracted to a solution to computer incompatibility, especially
coming with a simple user interface. In the marriage of hypertext
and the Internet, Robert was best man.

Robert's real gift was enthusiasm, translated into a genius for
spreading the gospel. While I sat down to begin to write the
Web's code, Robert, whose office was a several-minute walk
away, put his energy into making the WWW project happen at
CERN. He rewrote a new proposal in terms he felt would have
more effect. A CERN veteran since 1973, he lobbied among his
wide network of friends throughout the organization. He looked
for student helpers, money, machines, and office space.

By the time Mike Sendall approved my purchase of the NeXT
machine, I had already gone to the hypertext industry looking for
products onto which we could piggyback the Web. At CERN there
was a “Buy, don’t build” credo about acquiring new technology.
‘There were several commercial hypertext editors, and I thought
we could just add some Internet code so the hypertext documents
could be sent over the Internet. I thought the companies engaged
in the then fringe field of hypertext products would immediately
grasp the possibilities of the Web. Unfortunately, their reaction
was quite the opposite. "Nope," they said. "Too complicated.”

Undaunted, in September 1990 Robert and I went to the
European Conference on Hypertext Technology (ECHT) at Ver-
sailles to pitch the idea. The conference exhibition was small, but
there were a number of products on display, such as a multi-
media training manual for repairing a car.

1 approached Ian Ritchie and the folks from Owl Ltd., which
had a product called Guide. In Peter Brown's original Guide
work at the University of Southampton, when a user clicked on a
hypertext link, the new document would be inserted right there
in place. The version now commercialized by Ow! looked astonish-
ingly like what I had envisioned for a Web browsér—the program
26

 

info cern ch

{ would open and display documents, and preferably let people
vt them, too. All that was missing was the Internet. They've
«ready done the difficult bit! I thought, so I tried to persuade them
to add an Internet connection. They were friendly enough, but
they, too, were unconvinced.

I got the same response from others at the conference. It
seemed that explaining the vision of the Web to people was
exceedingly difficult without a Web browser in hand. People had
to be able to grasp the Web in full, which meant imagining a
whole world populated with Web sites and browsers. They had to
sense the abstract information space that the Web could bring
into being. It was a lot to ask.

The hypertext community may also have been slightly demor-
alized. Their small conference was not getting any bigger, and no
one was sure where the field was headed. The lack of commer-
cial successes had perhaps left a certain cynicism about bright
new ideas that could change the world.

Another possibility I saw was called Dynatext, and was from
Electronic Book Technology, a company in Rhode Island started
by Andy Van Dam, the Brown University researcher who had
coined the term electronic book. I thought the company's software
could be turned into a Web browser/editor rather easily. However,
like many hypertext products at the time, it was built around the
idea that a book had to be “compiled” (like a computer program)
to convert it from the form in which it was written to a form in
which it could be displayed efficiently. Accustomed to this cum-
bersome multistep process, the EBT people could not take me
seriously when I suggested that the original coded language could
be sent across the Web and displayed instantly on the screen.

They also insisted on a central link database to ensure that
there were no broken links. Their vision was limited to sending
text that was fixed and consistent—in this case, whole books. I
was looking at a living world of hypertext, in which all the pages
would be constantly changing. It was a huge philosophical gap.

ar

 
